# Reference Snippets

## references/EGNO_TensorCategories_Full.pdf
### Page 90

4.7. QUANTUM TRACES, PIVOTAL AND SPHERICAL CATEGORIES 73 Proposition 4.5.7. Let C and D be tensor categories with ﬁnitely many classes of simple objects. If F : C →D is a quasi-tensor functor, then FPdimD(F(X)) = FPdimC(X) for any X in C. Proof. This follows from Proposition 3.3.13. □ Remark 4.5.8. Proposition 4.5.7 fails in the situation when C has inﬁnitely many classes of simple objects, see Remark 5.12.10. Thus, we see that (multi)ring categories categorify rings (which justiﬁes the terminology), while quasi-tensor (in particular, tensor) functors between them cat- egorify unital ring homomorphisms. Note that Remark 4.3.4 may be regarded as a categorical analog of the Peirce decomposition in classical algebra. Exercise 4.5.9. Show that an object X of a ﬁnite tensor category C is invertible if and only if FPdim(X) = 1. 4.6. Deligne’s tensor product of tensor categories Let C, D be multiring categories. Recall the deﬁnition of Deligne’s tensor prod- uct of locally ﬁnite abelian categories from Section 1.11. Proposition 4.6.1. Deligne’s tensor product C ⊠D is a multiring category, which is a ring category, a multitensor category and a tensor category respectively if so are C and D. Proof. If C is a multiring category then the tensor product functor ⊗: C × C →C extends to an exact functor TC : C ⊠C →C, which is equipped with an isomorphism of functors TC◦(id ⊠TC) ∼= TC◦(TC⊠id) (the associativity isomorphism) which satisﬁes the pentagon relation (where we regard Deligne’s tensor product as a strictly associative operation). Thus, in the situation of the proposition, we can deﬁne an exact functor (TC ⊠TD) ◦(23) : C ⊠D ⊠C ⊠D →C ⊠D, where (23) stands for the permutation of components 2 and 3. Now, for X, Y ∈ C ⊠D, set X ⊗Y := ((TC ⊠TD) ◦(23))(X ⊠Y ). The associativity isomorphism for ⊗comes from the associativity isomorphisms for TC and TD, and it satisﬁes the pentagon relation because so do the associativity isomorphisms for TC and TD. The existence of the unit object and the unit axiom are obvious. This implies that C ⊠D is a multiring category, which is a ring category if (and only if) so are C and D. If the categories C and D admit duals, then so does C ⊠D (namely, its duality functor is simply Deligne’s tensor product of the duality functors for C and D). The proposition is proved. □ Corollary 4.6.2. Deligne’s tensor product of (multi)tensor categories is a (multi)tensor category. Deligne’s tensor product of (multi)fusion categories is a (multi)fusion category. 4.7. Quantum traces, pivotal and spherical categories Definition 4.7.1. Let C be a rigid monoidal category, V be an object in C, and a ∈HomC(V, V ∗∗). Deﬁne its left categorical (or quantum) trace (4.8) TrL(a) : 1 coevV −−−→V ⊗V ∗ a⊗idV ∗ −−−−−→V ∗∗⊗V ∗ evV ∗ −−−→1. Author's final version made available with permission of the publisher, American Mathematical Society. License or copyright restrictions may apply to redistribution; see http://www.ams.org/publications/ebooks/terms

### Page 91

74 4. TENSOR CATEGORIES Similarly, if a ∈Hom(V, ∗∗V ) then we can deﬁne the right quantum trace (4.9) TrR(a) : 1 coev∗V −−−−→∗V ⊗V id∗V ⊗a −−−−−→∗V ⊗∗∗V ev∗∗V −−−−→1. Remark 4.7.2. By deﬁnition, TrL(a), TrR(a) ∈EndC(1). When C is a tensor category over k, TrL(a) and TrR(a) can be regarded as elements of k. The following proposition shows that usual linear algebra formulas hold for the quantum trace. Proposition 4.7.3. If a ∈HomC(V, V ∗∗), b ∈HomC(W, W ∗∗) then (1) TrL(a) = TrR(a∗); (2) TrL(a ⊕b) = TrL(a) + TrL(b) (in additive categories); (3) TrL(a ⊗b) = TrL(a) TrL(b); (4) If c ∈Hom(V, V ) then TrL(ac) = TrL(c∗∗a), TrR(ac) = TrR(∗∗ca). Equalities similar to (2) and (3) also hold for right quantum traces. Exercise 4.7.4. Prove Proposition 4.7.3. When C is a multitensor category, it is useful to generalize Proposition 4.7.3(2) as follows. Proposition 4.7.5. If a ∈HomC(V, V ∗∗) and W ⊂V such that a(W) ⊂W ∗∗ then TrL V (a) = TrL(a|W )+TrL(a|V/W ). That is, TrL is additive on exact sequences. The same statement holds for right quantum traces. Exercise 4.7.6. Prove Proposition 4.7.5. Hint: use the 3-step ﬁltration on V ∗⊗V induced by the exact sequence 0 → W →V →V/W →0. Definition 4.7.7. Let C be a rigid monoidal category. A pivotal structure on C is an isomorphism of monoidal functors aX : X ∼ −→X∗∗. That is, a pivotal structure is a collection of isomorphisms aX : X ∼ −→X∗∗ natural in X and satisfying aX⊗Y = aX ⊗aY for all objects X, Y in C. Definition 4.7.8. A rigid monoidal category C equipped with a pivotal struc- ture is said to be pivotal. Exercise 4.7.9. Show that if a is a pivotal structure on C then aV ∗= (aV )∗−1. Hence, aV ∗∗= a∗∗ V . Example 4.7.10. The categories Vec, VecG, Rep(G) have a canonical pivotal structure coming from the natural isomorphisms of vector spaces V ∼ −→V ∗∗for objects V . Let a be a pivotal structure on a rigid monoidal category C. Definition 4.7.11. The dimension TrL of an object X with respect to a is dima(X) = Tr(aX) ∈EndC(1). Thus, in a tensor category over k, dimensions are elements of k. Also, it follows from Exercise 4.7.9 that dima(V ) = dima(V ∗∗). Proposition 4.7.12. If C is a tensor category, then the function [X] →dima(X) is a character of the Grothendieck ring Gr(C). Author's final version made available with permission of the publisher, American Mathematical Society. License or copyright restrictions may apply to redistribution; see http://www.ams.org/publications/ebooks/terms

### Page 92

4.7. QUANTUM TRACES, PIVOTAL AND SPHERICAL CATEGORIES 75 Proof. Proposition 4.7.5 implies that dima is additive on exact sequences, which means that it gives rise to a well-deﬁned linear map from Gr(C) to k. The fact that this map is a character follows from the obvious fact that dima(1) = 1 and Proposition 4.7.3(3). □ Corollary 4.7.13. Dimensions of objects in a pivotal ﬁnite tensor category are algebraic integers in k 2. Proof. This follows from the fact that a character of any ring that is ﬁnitely generated as a Z-module takes values in algebraic integers. □ Definition 4.7.14. A pivotal structure a on a tensor category C is spherical if dima(V ) = dima(V ∗) for any object V in C. A tensor category is spherical if it is equipped with a spherical structure. Since dima is additive on exact sequences, it suﬃces to require the property dima(V ) = dima(V ∗) only for simple objects V . Theorem 4.7.15. Let C be a spherical category and V be an object of C. Then for any x ∈HomC(V, V ) one has TrL(aV x) = TrR(xa−1 V ). Proof. We ﬁrst note that TrR(a−1 X ) = dima(X∗) for any object X by Propo- sition 4.7.3(1) and Exercise 4.7.9(1). Now let us prove the proposition in the special case when V is semisimple. Thus V =  i Yi ⊗Vi, where Vi are vector spaces and Yi are simple objects. Then x =  i xi ⊗idVi with xi ∈Endk(Yi) and aV =  idYi ⊗aVi (by naturality of a). Hence TrL(aV x) =  i Tr(xi) dim(Vi), TrR(xa−1 V ) =  i Tr(xi) dim(V ∗ i ). This implies the result for a semisimple V . Consider now the general case. Then V has the socle ﬁltration (1.10) (4.10) 0 = V0 ⊂V1 ⊂V2 ⊂· · · ⊂Vn = V such that Vi+1/Vi is a maximal semisimple subobject in V/Vi. This ﬁltration is preserved by x and by a (i.e., a : Vi →V ∗∗ i ). Since traces are additive on exact sequences by Proposition 4.7.5, this implies that the general case of the required statement follows from the semisimple case. □ Exercise 4.7.16. Let Aut⊗(idC) be the group of natural monoidal automor- phisms of the identity endofunctor of C. Show that the set of isomorphism classes of pivotal structures on C is a torsor over Aut⊗(idC), and the set of isomorphism classes of spherical structures on C is a torsor over the subgroup Aut⊗(idC)2 in Aut⊗(idC) of elements which have order ≤2 on simple objects. 2If k has positive characteristic, by an algebraic integer in k we mean an element of a ﬁnite subﬁeld of k. Author's final version made available with permission of the publisher, American Mathematical Society. License or copyright restrictions may apply to redistribution; see http://www.ams.org/publications/ebooks/terms

### Page 93

76 4. TENSOR CATEGORIES 4.8. Semisimple multitensor categories Let k be an algebraically closed ﬁeld. In this section we will more closely consider semisimple multitensor categories over k. They have some important additional properties compared to the general case. Proposition 4.8.1. Let C be a semisimple multitensor category over k and let V be an object in C. Then ∗V ∼= V ∗. Hence, V ∼= V ∗∗. Proof. We may assume that V is simple. We claim that the unique simple object X such that HomC(1, V ⊗X) ̸= 0 is V ∗. Indeed, HomC(1, V ⊗X) ∼= HomC(∗X, V ) which is nonzero if and only if ∗X ∼= V , i.e., X ∼= V ∗. Similarly, the unique simple object X such that HomC(V ⊗X, 1) ̸= 0 is ∗V . But since C is semisimple, dimk HomC(1, V ⊗X) = dimk HomC(V ⊗X, 1), which implies the result. □ Remark 4.8.2. The result of Proposition 4.8.1 is false without the semisim- plicity assumption, see Example 7.19.5. Proposition 4.8.1 gives rise to the following question. Question 4.8.3. Does every semisimple tensor category admit a pivotal struc- ture? A spherical structure? This is the case for all known examples. The general answer is unknown to us at the moment of writing (even for fusion categories over ground ﬁelds of characteristic zero). Proposition 4.8.4. Let C be a semisimple tensor category over k, let V be a simple object in C and a : V ∼ −→V ∗∗be an isomorphism. Then TrR(a) ̸= 0 and TrL(a) ̸= 0 . Proof. The trace of a is the composition 1 →V ⊗V ∗→1, where both morphisms are nonzero. If this composition is zero then there is a nonzero morphism (V ⊗V ∗)/1 →1, which means that [V ⊗V ∗: 1] ≥2. Since C is semisimple, this implies that dimk Hom(1, V ⊗V ∗) is at least 2. Hence, dimk Hom(V, V ) ≥2 which contradicts the simplicity of V . □ Remark 4.8.5. The above result is false for non-semisimple categories over ﬁelds of positive characteristic. For example, let C = Repk(GLp(Fp)), the represen- tation category of the group GLp(Fp) over a ﬁeld k of characteristic p. Let V be the p-dimensional vector representation of GLp(Fp) (which is clearly irreducible). Let a : V →V ∗∗be the identity map. Then Tr(a) = dimk(V ) = p = 0 in k. A counterexample in characteristic 0 is the vector representation of the Lie superalgebra gl(n|n), or the Steinberg representation (irreducible of dimension p) of the small quantum group uq(sl2), where q is a root of unity of order p (see Chapter 5). 4.9. Grothendieck rings of semisimple tensor categories Proposition 4.9.1. If C is a semisimple multitensor category then Gr(C) is a based ring. If C is a semisimple tensor category then Gr(C) is a unital based ring. If C is a (multi)fusion category, then Gr(C) is a (multi)fusion ring. Author's final version made available with permission of the publisher, American Mathematical Society. License or copyright restrictions may apply to redistribution; see http://www.ams.org/publications/ebooks/terms

## references/EGNO_TensorCategories.pdf
### Page 70

70 Proposition 1.37.1. If a ∈Hom(V, V ∗∗), b ∈Hom(W, W ∗∗) then (1) TrL V (a) = TrR V ∗(a∗); (2) TrL V ⊕W(a ⊕b) = TrL V (a) + TrL W(b) (in additive categories); (3) TrL V ⊗W(a ⊗b) = TrL V (a)TrL W(b); (4) If c ∈Hom(V, V ) then TrL V (ac) = TrL V (c∗∗a), TrR V (ac) = TrR V (∗∗ca). Similar equalities to (2),(3) also hold for right quantum traces. Exercise 1.37.2. Prove Proposition 1.37.1. If C is a multitensor category, it is useful to generalize Proposi- tion 1.37.1(2) as follows. Proposition 1.37.3. If a ∈Hom(V, V ∗∗) and W ⊂V such that a(W) ⊂W ∗∗then TrL V (a) = TrL W(a) + TrL V/W(a). That is, Tr is addi- tive on exact sequences. The same statement holds for right quantum traces. Exercise 1.37.4. Prove Proposition 1.37.3. 1.38. Pivotal categories and dimensions. Deﬁnition 1.38.1. Let C be a rigid monoidal category. A pivotal structure on C is an isomorphism of monoidal functors a : Id ∼−→?∗∗. That is, a pivotal structure is a collection of morphisms aX : X ∼−→ X∗∗natural in X and satisfying aX⊗Y = aX ⊗aY for all objects X, Y in C. Deﬁnition 1.38.2. A rigid monoidal category C equipped with a piv- otal structure is said to be pivotal. Exercise 1.38.3. (1) If a is a pivotal structure then aV ∗= (aV )∗−1. Hence, aV ∗∗= a∗∗ V . (2) Let C = Rep(H), where H is a ﬁnite dimensional Hopf alge- bra. Show that pivotal structures on C bijectively correspond to group-like elements of H such that gxg−1 = S2(x) for all x ∈H. Let a be a pivotal structure on a rigid monoidal category C. Deﬁnition 1.38.4. The dimension of an object X with respect to a is dima(X) := Tr(aX) ∈End(1). Thus, in a tensor category over k, dimensions are elements of k. Also, it follows from Exercise 1.38.3 that dima(V ) = dima(V ∗∗). Proposition 1.38.5. If C is a tensor category, then the function X 7→ dima(X) is a character of the Grothendieck ring Gr(C).

### Page 71

71 Proof. Proposition 1.37.3 implies that dima is additive on exact se- quences, which means that it gives rise to a well-deﬁned linear map from Gr(C) to k. The fact that this map is a character follows from the obvious fact that dima(1) = 1 and Proposition 1.37.1(3). □ Corollary 1.38.6. Dimensions of objects in a pivotal ﬁnite tensor cat- egory are algebraic integers in k. 12 Proof. This follows from the fact that a character of any ring that is ﬁnitely generated as a Z-module takes values in algebraic integers. □ 1.39. Spherical categories. Deﬁnition 1.39.1. A pivotal structure a on a tensor category C is spherical if dima(V ) = dima(V ∗) for any object V in C. A tensor category is spherical if it is equipped with a spherical structure. Since dima is additive on exact sequences, it suﬃces to require the property dima(V ) = dima(V ∗) only for simple objects V . Theorem 1.39.2. Let C be a spherical category and V be an object of C. Then for any x ∈Hom(V, V ) one has TrL V (aV x) = TrR V (xa−1 V ). Proof. We ﬁrst note that TrR X(a−1 X ) = dima(X∗) for any object X by Proposition 1.37.1(1) and Exercise 1.38.3(1). Now let us prove the proposition in the special case when V is semisimple. Thus V = ⊕i Yi⊗ Vi, where Vi are vector spaces and Yi are simple objects. Then x = ⊕i xi⊗IdVi with xi ∈Endk(Yi) and a = ⊕IdYi⊗aVi (by the functoriality of a). Hence TrL V (ax) = X Tr(xi) dim(Vi), TrR V (xa−1) = X Tr(xi) dim(V ∗ i ). This implies the result for a semisimple V . Consider now the general case. Then V has the coradical ﬁltration (1.39.1) 0 = V0 ⊂V1 ⊂V2 ⊂· · · ⊂Vn = V (such that Vi+1/Vi is a maximal semisimple subobject in V/Vi). This ﬁltration is preserved by x and by a (i.e., a : Vi →V ∗∗ i ). Since traces are additive on exact sequences by Proposition 1.37.3, this implies that the general case of the required statement follows from the semisimple case. □ 12If k has positive characteristic, by an algebraic integer in k we mean an element of a ﬁnite subﬁeld of k.

### Page 72

72 Exercise 1.39.3. (i) Let Aut⊗(IdC) be the group of isomorphism classes of monoidal automorphisms of a monoidal category C. Show that the set of isomorphism classes of pivotal structures on C is a torsor over Aut⊗(IdC), and the set of isomorphism classes of spherical structures on C is a torsor over the subgroup Aut⊗(IdC)2 in Aut⊗(IdC) of elements which act by ±1 on simple objects. 1.40. Semisimple multitensor categories. In this section we will more closely consider semisimple multitensor categories which have some important additional properties compared to the general case. 1.41. Isomorphism between V ∗∗and V . Proposition 1.41.1. Let C be a semisimple multitensor category and let V be an object in C. Then ∗V ∼= V ∗. Hence, V ∼= V ∗∗. Proof. We may assume that V is simple. We claim that the unique simple object X such that Hom(1, V ⊗X) ̸= 0 is V ∗. Indeed, Hom(1, V ⊗X) ∼= Hom(∗X, V ) which is non-zero if and only if ∗X ∼= V , i.e., X ∼= V ∗. Similarly, the unique simple object X such that Hom(V ⊗X, 1) ̸= 0 is ∗V . But since C is semisimple, dimk Hom(1, V ⊗X) = dimk Hom(V ⊗X, 1), which implies the result. □ Remark 1.41.2. As noted in Remark 1.27.2, the result of Proposi- tion 1.41.1 is false for non-semisimple categories. Remark 1.41.3. Proposition 1.41.1 gives rise to the following ques- tion. Question 1.41.4. Does any semisimple tensor category admit a piv- otal structure? A spherical structure? This is the case for all known examples. The general answer is un- known to us at the moment of writing (even for ground ﬁelds of char- acteristic zero). Proposition 1.41.5. If C is a semisimple tensor category and a : V ∼−→ V ∗∗for a simple object V then Tr(a) ̸= 0. Proof. Tr(a) is the composition morphism of the diagram 1 →V ⊗ V ∗→1 where both morphisms are non-zero. If the composition mor- phism is zero then there is a non-zero morphism (V ⊗V ∗)/1 →1 which means that the [V ⊗V ∗: 1] ≥2. Since C is semisimple, this implies that dimk Hom(1, V ⊗V ∗) is at least 2. Hence, dimk Hom(V, V ) ≥2 which contradicts the simplicity of V . □

## references/DGNO_BraidedFusionI.pdf
### Page 9

ON BRAIDED FUSION CATEGORIES I 9 2.4.2. Traces, squared norms, and global dimension. Let C be a fusion category and let ψ be any natural (not necessarily tensor) isomorphism between the identity and the functor of taking the second dual. Such an isomorphism exists in any fusion category. It is completely determined by a collection of isomorphisms ψX : X ∼ −→ X∗∗, X ∈O(C). For any object X of C let evX : X∗⊗X →1 and coevX : 1 →X ⊗X∗ denote the evaluation and coevaluation maps of X. For any morphism f : X →X we can deﬁne two traces, depending on ψ: Tr+(f) : 1 coevX −−−−→X ⊗X∗ ψXf⊗idX∗ −−−−−−−→X∗∗⊗X∗ evX∗ −−−→1, (2) Tr−(f) : 1 coevX∗ −−−−−→X∗⊗X∗∗ idX∗⊗fψ−1 X −−−−−−−−→X∗⊗X evX −−→1. (3) Let us denote d+(X) = Tr+(idX) and d−(X) = Tr−(idX). Note that d±(X) ̸= 0 for all simple X, see e.g., [ENO] or [BK]. The dimensions d±(X) are of course non-canonical since they depend on the choice of ψ. However, for any X ∈O(C) we have a canonical quantity (4) |X|2 := d+(X)d−(X), known as M¨uger’s squared norm of X (the deﬁnition is due to M. M¨uger [Mu4], the name and notation were introduced in §2 of [ENO]). The squared norm |X|2 is independent of the choice of ψ. Note that for any morphism f : X ⊗Y →X ⊗Y we can deﬁne morphisms idX ⊗Tr+(f) : X coevY −−−−→X ⊗Y ⊗Y ∗ (idX⊗ψY )(f⊗idY ∗) −−−−−−−−−−−−−→X ⊗Y ∗∗⊗Y ∗ evY ∗ −−−→X, Tr−⊗idY (f) : Y coevX∗ −−−−−→X∗⊗X∗∗⊗Y (idX∗⊗f)(ψ−1 X ⊗idY ) −−−−−−−−−−−−−→X∗⊗X ⊗Y evX −−→Y. Note that Tr+(Tr−⊗idY )(f) = Tr−(idX ⊗Tr+)(f). We will denote the latter by Tr−⊗Tr+(f). Let kcyc ⊂k be the maximal cyclotomic extension of Q in k, i.e., the subﬁeld generated by all roots of unity. The automorphism of kcyc that takes each root of unity to its inverse is called complex conjugation and denoted by z 7→¯z. Deﬁne kRcyc := {z ∈kcyc|¯z = z}; this is the maximal totally real subﬁeld of kcyc. It follows from [ENO, Remark 3.1] and [ENO, Corollary 8.53] that for every X ∈O(C) its squared norm |X|2 is a totally positive algebraic integer in kRcyc. According to [O3], if C is braided (but not in general) the ideal in the ring of algebraic integers generated by the squared norm of any simple object of X is stable under Gal(¯Q/Q). The categorical dimension (also known as global dimension ) of a fusion category C is deﬁned to be the sum of squared norms of its simple objects: (5) dim(C) = X X∈O(C) d+(X)d−(X) = X X∈O(C) |X|2, where d± are the dimensions introduced above. The categorical dimension is a totally positive algebraic integer in kRcyc which does not depend on a choice of ψ. Moreover, according to [O3], the ideal in the ring of algebraic integers generated by dim(C) is stable under Gal(¯Q/Q).

### Page 10

10 VLADIMIR DRINFELD, SHLOMO GELAKI, DMITRI NIKSHYCH, AND VICTOR OSTRIK 2.4.3. Pivotal structures and categorical dimensions. By deﬁnition, a pivotal struc- ture on a fusion category C is a tensor isomorphism ψ between the identity functor idC : C →C to the tensor functor X 7→X∗∗, X ∈C. If pivotal structures on C exist (conjecturally, this is always the case) then the set of all such structures is a torsor over the group of tensor automorphisms of idC, which equals Hom(UC, k×) by Proposition 2.3(iii). Let us ﬁx a pivotal structure ψ on C and let d± denote the dimensions deﬁned using ψ as in §2.4.2 above. It was explained in [ENO, §2] that d+(X∗) = d+(X) = d−(X) for any object X in C and that d+ deﬁnes a ring homomorphism d+ : K0(C) →kcyc. When no confusion is possible we write d instead of d+. The element d(X) ∈kcyc is called the categorical (or quantum) dimension of X ∈K0(C). The above homomorphism d : K0(C) →kcyc depends on the pivotal structure as follows: if the pivotal structure is composed with the tensor automorphism of idC corresponding to f : UC →k× then d(X) is multiplied by f(deg X) for every X ∈O(C). Here deg : O(C) →UC is the universal grading. In particular, a pivotal structure is uniquely determined by the corresponding homomorphism d : K0(C) →kcyc. A pivotal structure is said to be spherical if d+(X) = d−(X) for all X, or, equivalently, if the corresponding homomorphism d : K0(C) →kcyc satisﬁes the relation d(X∗) = d(X). This is equivalent to the condition (6) d+(X) ∈kRcyc for all X. If spherical structures on C exist then they form a torsor over Hom(UC, µ2), where µ2 := {1, −1} ⊂k×. Note that in the case of a spherical structure equality (4) can be rewritten as (7) d+(X)2 = |X|2. A spherical fusion category is a fusion category with a spherical structure. Remark 2.9. If C is a pivotal category then for any X ∈C and f ∈EndX one has the numbers Tr±(f) ∈k deﬁned by formulas (2)-(3). If C is spherical then Tr+(f) = Tr−(f) (if X is simple and f = idX this is clear from the equlaity Tr±(f) = d±(X), and the general case follows). So if C is spherical one writes Tr(f) instead of Tr±(f). 2.4.4. Spherical extension of a fusion category. According to [ENO, ENO2], in any fusion category C there is a canonical isomorphism g between the tensor functors idC and the fourth duality functor X 7→X∗∗∗∗, X ∈C. The spherical extension, or sphericalization of C (denoted by Csph) is deﬁned to be the fusion category whose objects are pairs (X, fX), where X ∈O(D) and fX : X →X∗∗is an isomorphism such that f ∗∗ X fX = gX, and a morphism from (X, fX) to (X′, fX′) is a morphism h : X →X′ in C such that fX′h = h∗∗fX. Note that for any simple X there are exactly two choices of fX which diﬀer one from another by a sign. The category Csph is a spherical fusion category; its spherical structure is given by fX : (X, fX) →(X∗∗, fX∗∗). Note that dim(Csph) = 2 dim(C). Remark 2.10. The spherical extension is a particular case of the equivariantization construction described in §4.2.2. Namely, any fusion category C is equipped with a canonical action of Z/2Z such that the non-trivial element of Z/2Z takes each

### Page 11

ON BRAIDED FUSION CATEGORIES I 11 X ∈C to X∗∗. The fusion category Csph is nothing but the category of equivariant objects of C with respect to this action. 2.5. Properties of tensor functors. Proposition 2.11. Let C, D be fusion categories and let F : D →C be a tensor functor. (i) F is fully faithful if and only if the map HomD(X, 1) →HomC(F(X), 1) is an isomorphism for all X ∈D. (ii) If FPdim(C) = FPdim(D) and F is fully faithful then F is an equivalence. (iii) If FPdim(C) = FPdim(D) and F is surjective then F is an equivalence. Proof. To prove (i) observe that for all objects X, Y in D we have HomD(X, Y ) = HomD(X ⊗Y ∗, 1) and HomC(F(X), F(Y )) = HomC(F(X ⊗Y ∗), 1). Statements (ii) and (iii) are proved in [EO, Propositions 2.19, 2.20]. □ Lemma 2.12. Let C be a fusion category, D1, D2 ⊂C be fusion subcategories, and F : D1 ⊠D2 →C be a tensor functor whose restriction to Di is the natural embedding Di ֒→C, i = 1, 2. Then F is fully faithful if and only if D1 ∩D2 = Vec. Proof. Let X1 ⊠X2 be a simple object of D1 ⊠D2. Then HomC(F(X1 ⊠X2), 1) = HomC(X1 ⊗X2, 1) = HomC(X1, X∗ 2). This is zero for all X1 ⊠X2 ̸= 1 ⊠1 if and only if the intersection of D1 and D2 is trivial. Hence the statement follows from Proposition 2.11(i). □ 2.6. Pseudo-unitarity. Let C be a fusion category and ϕ : kRcyc →R a ﬁeld embedding. Deﬁnition 2.13. C is ϕ-pseudounitary if ϕ(dim(C)) = FPdim(C). Remark 2.14. According to Proposition 8.21 of [ENO], for any ﬁeld embedding ϕ : kRcyc →R one has (8) ϕ(|X|2) ≤FPdim(X)2 for all X ∈O(C). Therefore ϕ(dim(C)) ≤FPdim(C), and ϕ-pseudounitarity means that (9) ϕ(|X|2) = FPdim(X)2 for all X ∈O(C). Deﬁnition 2.15. A spherical structure on C is ϕ-positive if the corresponding homomorphism d : K0(C) →kRcyc satisﬁes ϕ(d(X)) > 0 for all X ∈O(C). By (7), a ϕ-positive spherical structure is unique if it exists. Proposition 2.16. A ϕ-pseudounitary fusion category has a (unique) ϕ-positive spherical structure. This is [ENO, Proposition 8.23]. By (7) and (9), for the ϕ-positive spherical structure on a pseudounitary fusion category C one has (10) ϕ(d(X)) = FPdim(X).
